---
tags:
  - source
  - topic/ai
  - topic/education/writing
  - topic/academic-integrity
alias:
  - "What AI tools like ChatGPT can write, how should we teach writing?"
  - "@bernoff2022"
type: article
title: "What AI tools like ChatGPT can write, how should we teach writing?"
author: "Josh Bernoff"
publisher: "Without Bullshit"
date: 2022-12-15
url: "https://withoutbullshit.com/blog/when-ai-tools-like-chatgpt-can-write-how-should-we-teach-writing"
---
# What AI tools like ChatGPT can write, how should we teach writing?
- [[Josh Bernoff]] wrote this article for [[Without Bullshit]].
- <https://withoutbullshit.com/blog/when-ai-tools-like-chatgpt-can-write-how-should-we-teach-writing>
> [!summary] Summary
> %% Write a one-sentence summary of the source. %%

## Notes
> It forces every learner into the same box doing the same work to get the same result.
>
> That is arguably the right way to teach arithmetic: if all the students use the same steps to add 154 and 316, they will all get the same result if they do it properly. That’s good, because there is only one right answer to that problem.
>
> what we were teaching wasn’t writing, it was production-line word and sentence assembly. It was boring for students and boring for teachers. It was tedious, taught students that writing was based on following a formula, and penalized creative thinkers.

^df27c1

Traditional writing assessment requires students to follow protocol and punishes creative problem-solving.

> he goal of teaching writing is to build students’ skill in using all available tools to create writing that effectively accomplishes a goal.

> Having recast the goal of teaching, we need new assignments for students. What would those assignments look like?

> Here are some examples:
> - Start a blog. Write a paragraph every day for a week about your experiences, how they felt, or what you learned.
> - We’re going to write about public school funding. Ask ChatGPT to write a five-paragraph theme on the topic. Now edit it to make it better. Share both versions and tell me what makes yours an improvement.
> - Read chapter two of the assigned book. Now write what you think about it. You can write an essay, a poem, a set of hip-hop lyrics, a set of Google slides, or anything else you want. Now share what you wrote with a partner. What did you like about what they wrote? Would it change what you write next?
> - Write three different prompts for a writing assignment. Use two different AI writing tools with the prompts. What changes in the output? Which prompt gives better results? Why do think that is?
> - Write a page on the assigned topic. (Don’t use an AI tool, please.) I, your teacher, will pour all the assignments you create into an AI tool I have, along with AI-generated answers to the assignment. I’ll then show you what some of the common themes were, and what creative solutions other people came up with. What can we learn from the way humans solve writing problems compared to the way computers take on the same task?

^3e0b3b

Post-AI writing assessments focus on writing labor, revision, and comparing AI results.

> AI can help teachers, too.
> When I reviewed John Warner’s brilliant book on teaching writing, Why They Can’t Write, I cited his prescription for a better way to teach writing:
> > - Limit the number of students per teacher, and pay the teachers a living wage.
> > - Assign real-world writing assignments (like a review, or a persuasive argument) and give the students the tools to analyze good examples of people who do those well. They should work inside an actual rhetorical situation with an actual intended audience.
> > - Focus on writing practice and rewriting based on comments from the teacher. (This means that the teacher has to have the time to generate thoughtful comments.)
> > - Grade based on quantity of thoughtful writing created, rather than on achieving or approaching perfection. As it turns out (at least in Warner’s classes), the more work the students put in, the more improvement they achieve, and that is worth rewarding. 

^c73cbe

AI tools will make teaching easier to do and more scalable.

> Nonfiction writing is the expression of logic. It’s problem-solving. Taught effectively, it’s even enjoyable, since it allows each individual to express what is unique about them.

^93bbb8

Nonfiction writing is essentially a problem-solving skill, and AI can be a part of that.