---
tags:
  - "source"
  - "topic/higher-education"
  - "topic/dei"
  - "topic/critical-theory/microaggressions"
  - "topic/higher-education/retention"
draft: true
---
# Reducing Microaggressions in Learning Environments Expert Insights 

## Teresa A. Nance, PhD; Vice President, Diversity, Equity and Inclusion; Chief Diversity Officer; Associate Professor; Villanova University [00:00:11] 
Perhaps the best way to begin a conversation with micro, about microaggressions is to start with the definition. Most of us use the definition by Derald Wing Sue, who says it's the everyday slights and insults experienced by a minority group or one group because of their minority group status. And as you begin to think about microaggressions, the word becomes problematic because we have this first part of the word micro, which is a diminutive that gets hooked on to this really egregious last part of the word, which is aggression. And so you wonder, can an aggression be micro? And perhaps this issue was brought to the fore recently in Ibram X. Kendi's book, "How to Be an Anti-Racist", where he actually says, I abhor the word microaggression, and he says that any racist comment is an aggression. We need to deal with the fact that is racist and it's a problem. So let me give you an example. Let's say that there is a black student and you say to that black student, and you're a white person, you say, you know, you really speak well. Now, I can fully understand that that person thinks that they gave the student a compliment, but it is anything but a compliment. Let's go and think about what the assumptions are. It sounds as though the person is surprised that here at this university, at this college is someone who speaks well. Well, if you got into the college and you're in this class, wouldn't you assume that they would be able to speak well? So your surprise is actually a diminuation of who I am. I don't look like I'm somebody who can speak well. I don't look like somebody who would be competent. And isn't it wonderful that you are accepting me as a competent and, and knowledgeable person? That's the problem. 

[[Microaggressions are indirect insults related to another person's minority status]]

## Marlo Goldstein Hode, PhD; Senior Manager, Strategic Diversity Initiatives; University of Missouri - St. Louis [00:02:33] 
There are some formal definitions by Derald Wing Sue, for example, that you hear repeated in a lot of places, and I think that are helpful, but it's a little bit clunky. And so what I like to do is talk about the main components or aspects to microaggressions. So the first thing that you need to know about microaggressions is this idea of intent versus impact. And oftentime microaggressions occur in the form of a compliment or a curious question or an offhanded, unintentional remark. And so although that person may have not had any intention to hurt, that doesn't deflect from the fact that it does cause pain. So intent versus impact is one important component. It's also important to understand that microaggressions are not just about these individual interactions, but they also happen in an environment. For example, if you're on campus and you have a picture of, for student leadership and all the students are white and you're a student of color walking past that every day, that is sending a message that you do not look like a student leader. And that, again, is this unintentional microaggression. 

[[Microaggressions are often unintended, but the impact of them is what is important to consider]]

## Sharoni Denise Little, PhD, EdD; Vice Dean/Senior Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Officer; Professor, Business Communication; University of Southern California; CEO, The Strategist Company, LLC [00:03:51] 
A microaggression is a combination of behaviors and or actions directed toward individuals based upon perceived attributes, characteristics, limitations, deficits. So whether it's statements, nonverbal interactions, assaults, ways in which that we discount and validate and insult individuals based upon some aspect of their identity. 

## Santiba D. Campbell, PhD; Associate Professor, Psychology; Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences; Bennett College [00:04:21] 
Microaggressions are everyday, small nuances that speak to biases and different groups of people. I think the kicker to remember with microaggressions is there's nothing really micro about them. So that small passive statement could have a huge impact on our students. So this is why it's very important that we have conversations about understanding what these microaggressions can be.

## Jennifer Imazeki, PhD; Associate Chief Diversity Officer for Faculty and Staff; Professor of Economics; San Diego State University [00:04:47] 
So that's the other important thing about microaggressions for people who experience them; it's not a one-time thing. They happen repeatedly. Each individual incident may seem like not a big deal, but because they happen repeatedly and reflect these. Assumptions and biases that people hold, that society holds, they become ingrained in our experience, those of us who, who experience them. There are a couple of different analogies that get used a lot. One is paper cuts, an individual paper cut, not a big deal. You heal, you move on. But if you get multiple paper cuts all the time, every day, every time you pick up a piece of paper, you start to be very anxious about picking up paper. 

## Marlo Goldstein Hode, PhD [00:05:44] 
So even one small microaggression can have a macro effect on a person, particularly if that's something that they're going through every day. The research shows that there are a variety of negative mental and physical impacts from microaggressions. So part of it is the cognitive processing that cannot be used for thinking and learning. The other part of it is that when you're under stress, your body releases cortisol and cortisol is connected to all sorts of health problems. So if you're an environment where you're constantly subject to microaggressions, your body is having a physical response to that. So it can have negative health impact in terms of participating in school work or different types of groups. And at the university, it can really impact your sense of belonging. So you are not going to subject yourself to an environment where you are constantly being negatively stereotyped or receiving these microaggressions. So it may cause you to withdraw, but it most certainly has a negative impact on students sense of belonging in a place. 

## Jennifer Imazeki, PhD [00:07:11] 
I do think that instructors have a slight advantage relative to the general population of addressing these things in a classroom setting, because you can take the educators approach, right, that this isn't about shaming anybody. This isn't about judging anybody. It is about learning. And this is an opportunity to learn not only about the content of this course, but how to be better colleagues, classmates, individuals, and to present it through the educator lens.

## Marlo Goldstein Hode, PhD [00:07:53] 
My advice for instructors is first to preempt, you know, at the beginning of your class, share this idea, this, your understanding of what microaggressions are to your students and let them know that these are behaviors that we may all unintentionally engage in, but we all want to be aware of and not do them. And that you as the instructor are a human being and definitely fallible and you may unintentionally say something. So you say that in the up front. Then, if it comes out during the course where you do catch yourself saying something, you know, you have a go-to moment. So remember that thing I told you about? I just did that. And I want to, you know, take a moment to to recognize that. 

## Jennifer Imazeki, PhD [00:08:36] 
If you use Zoom or an online synchronous component, it's very common now to put students into breakout rooms, which is great for discussion. It also, because you, the instructor, are not in the space, can create an environment that you don't control, right? And again, having set ground rules and norms and community agreements at the beginning of the semester can be really helpful here. Any time you send your students into a space that you aren't going to be part of yourself, remind them of those community agreements. I'm about to put you in breakout rooms, let's just remember at the beginning of the semester, we all agreed that in these discussions we're going to treat each other with respect, etc., etc.. And just that little reminder before you put them into the rooms can be really useful for minimizing anything that might come up. 

## Teresa A. Nance, PhD [00:09:48] 
I think faculty can be very helpful in dealing in helping students deal with microaggressions. I think that one of the first things that faculty have to do is apologize to the student. You have to say to the student, I recognize that that hurts. I recognize that you've been harmed. I know that there are sometimes people who say, but I didn't do anything wrong. It doesn't matter. I think about my mother when somebody was crying or hurt, my mother would say, apologize first, explain later. So I would say I would give that, that advice. Apologize first. Second, I would get a handle on what the student is feeling, because the way that you might hear the microaggression might not be the way that the student hears the microaggression. So fully understand what is going on with the student. Then, depending... And the next step really depends on what the student wants to do. Does the student want want to have a conversation with the person who is who created the difficulty? And might they want you to help or to be a mediator or a facilitator of that conversation? Certainly, that's one thing to do. If the student wants to make it an official complaint, then there's the diversity officer, or in the in the dean of students office there are forms that in which the student can make that that complaint. 

## Marlo Goldstein Hode, PhD [00:11:23] 
I would say that no matter what course subject you teach at the beginning of the course, you want to set the tone for welcoming and inclusive environment. Let the students know that it's important that everyone knows that they belong there, that they wouldn't be there if they didn't belong there. That doesn't mean you need to give a whole lecture on microaggressions or implicit biases. But you can again, as part of this level setting and norms setting and community building at the beginning, acknowledge that these these things are out there and exist, can have an impact and that we all need to be aware. 

## Jennifer Imazeki, PhD [00:12:00] 
When students microaggress other students, it is very important for the instructor to intervene and address that as soon as possible and, again, in the same space as where the microaggression happened. So it can be tempting sometimes to address these things individually with students just pulling aside the student or having a private conversation or private communication with the student who committed the microaggression. Well, that's better than nothing. It doesn't address or repair any of the harm that was done to the student who experienced the microaggression. And that's where we really need to be thinking in terms of how do I help the student who was harmed and not just that student who may be reported it, but any other students who might have been part of that interaction. 

## Teresa A. Nance, PhD [00:13:07] 
You are never in a position to tell an individual that what just happened to them doesn't hurt, doesn't diminish them, doesn't make them feel badly. By believing people, I have to believe if we know that students or staff or faculty are being hurt by the insensitivities of the others in the institution, that we won't do something about it. Whether it's mandatory trainings for faculty and staff, whether it's creating more opportunities for diverse learning environments for our students, we literally need to create the kinds of, of programming and systems that will change that environment. And one of the things we have to recognize, too, especially as faculty, we can't leave this to student life. We can't leave this to extracurriculars. We have to hold a mirror up and say, what can we do in the way that we teach our courses in the seminars we offer, in the speakers we bring to campus, what can we do to call out racism at its roots? What can we do to identify the hurtful practices that have become regularized in this environment and make a change? We are accountable. We ought to act like it.