---
tags:
  - source
  - topic/ai
  - topic/sla
alias:  "AI for Language Learning: ChatGPT and the Future of ELT"
  - "@warner2022"
type: article
title: "AI for Language Learning: ChatGPT and the Future of ELT"
author: "Brent Warner"
publisher: "TESOL Blog"
date: 2022-12-19
url: "http://blog.tesol.org/ai-for-language-learning-chatgpt-and-the-future-of-elt/"
---
# AI for Language Learning: ChatGPT and the Future of ELT
[[Brent Warner]] wrote this article for [[TESOL Blog]].
> [!summary] Summary
> %% Write a one-sentence summary of the source. %%

## Notes
> If my goal as a teacher is to help students learn, then should I withhold access to the same information until the timing is convenient for me? Some teachers might look at this and ask if they’re even relevant anymore. I would suggest that the answer is yes, but our focus will shift on helping students develop even deeper critical thinking skills in English. Less motivated teachers who just want to teach grammar may be weeded out over time, but those who are ready to take deeper dives will get the opportunity to mentor students on their path to becoming confident and autonomous English users.

> My first thought on reading this response was “I got you! ChatGPT doesn’t have speech recognition!” but upon pressing (by asking for clarification), ChatGPT suggested that you can use pretty much any device with a microphone to transcribe your spoken English into the prompt box. Once the responses are generated, students can use screen reading software to verbalize the response. So here, ChatGPT is partially correct. While students may still have to deal with technology that doesn’t recognize their answers in speaking and listening, it will give them responses that can handily simulate a conversation, allowing for a tireless, fluent companion that students can practice with.

> Imagine the opportunity to turn nonacademic, informal content that is high interest and directly focused on any given student into an accessible i+1 level reading. Last year, I wrote about ways to create your own leveled readers, but with the release of ChatGPT, this can be fine tuned. Take a look at the following two examples. First, a simplification of a paragraph from the New York Times, then an “upgrading” of a simple paragraph from Time for Kids.

> Without a doubt, there are going to be problems with plagiarism and ghost writing, and there will be many who will simply throw up their hands and proclaim that they don’t need to study anymore, because look what ChatGPT can do! As teachers, it will be our responsibility to help students see not only what this type of AI can do for them, but what unimaginable futures it can build with them.

It's important to shape the future with AI instead of letting industries do it for us.