---
tags:
  - source
  - topic/ai
  - topic/academic-integrity
alias:  "How The ChatGPT Watermark Works And Why It Could Be Defeated"
  - "@montti2022"
type: article
title: "How The ChatGPT Watermark Works And Why It Could Be Defeated"
author: "Roger Montti"
publisher: "Search Engine Journal"
date: 2022-12-30
url: "https://www.searchenginejournal.com/chatgpt-watermark/475366/"
---
# How The ChatGPT Watermark Works And Why It Could Be Defeated
[[Roger Montti]] wrote this article for [[Search Engine Journal]].

> [!summary] Summary
> OpenAI is planning to implement a watermarking feature in chatGPT but its possible to remove it.

## Notes
> Watermarking text in ChatGPT involves cryptography in the form of embedding a pattern of words, letters and punctiation in the form of a secret code.

^995922

Watermarking uses a process of inserting patterns of characters that would be unnoticeable to humans to identify it as content generated by a particular tool.

> An influential computer scientist named [[Scott Aaronson]] was hired by OpenAI in June 2022 to work on AI Safety and Alignment.

> A large language model (LLM) like ChatGPT can be used in a way that may go contrary to the goals of [AI Alignment as defined by OpenAI](https://openai.com/alignment/), which is to create AI that benefits humanity.

> Aaronson explained the reason for watermarking ChatGPT output:
> 
> > “This could be helpful for preventing academic plagiarism, obviously, but also, for example, mass generation of propaganda…”

> ChatGPT watermarking is not currently in use. However Scott Aaronson at OpenAI is on record stating that it is planned.

> > if you used another AI to paraphrase GPT’s output—well okay, we’re not going to be able to detect that.”

^124053

Using one tool to re-write another tool's output would circumvent either form of identification.

> This is the technical explanation:
>
> > “To illustrate, in the special case that GPT had a bunch of possible tokens that it judged equally probable, you could simply choose whichever token maximized g. The choice would look uniformly random to someone who didn’t know the key, but someone who did know the key could later sum g over all n-grams and see that it was anomalously large.”

^749f00

Watermarking could also involve giving a disproportionate weight to certain word choices that would be unnoticeable by humans but easy to detect with access to the database it was generated from. 