---
tags:
  - "type/source"
  - "topic/teaching/higher-education"
  - "topic/dei"
  - "topic/teaching/higher-education/retention"
draft: true
---
## Jennifer Imazeki, PhD; Associate Chief Diversity Officer for Faculty and Staff; Professor of Economics; San Diego State University [00:00:05]
There's a number of things I think that can be done to make our courses and course materials more inclusive. Materials are actually, in my mind, a little more straightforward to think about. Look at your syllabus. Look at your reading list. Look at your textbook, right? Flipping through the pages, what images do you see in your textbook? Who are the authors on your reading list? Do they reflect not only a range of social identities that may be more relatable to your students, but do they reflect a range of perspectives within your discipline? And I think that for, depending on your discipline, it can be challenging to think about, you know, this is the way this course has always been taught. There's certain content that (I teach economics) an intro economics course, there's certain things that will always be taught. There are seminal papers that are on every reading list. So really interrogating why those things are there, and will they be relevant to all of my students, that it just takes some intentionality. 

## Narrator [00:01:22]
When creating a new website, a web designer makes both practical and creative decisions. What will make the home page pop and speak to the target audience? Which information should be included and where? What navigation and features will make for the best user experience? How about the aesthetic and readability of the layout, colors, fonts, and images? The elements that matter when designing a website—overall impressions, representation of content, clarity, and accessibility—matter just as much when designing your course. Your syllabus, like a website's homepage, is your students' first impression of the course and of you. Design with equity in mind. Include a diversity statement, clearly communicating that all students have value and bring unique perspectives worthy of consideration. Signal your intention to accommodate students' varied learning needs and identities and to eliminate any barriers to success with an accessibility statement and course policies that demonstrate respect for who your students are and how they learn. Ensure your students know how to inform you about absences for religious holidays and that your grading system builds in opportunities for failure, learning, and growth. Be sure your tone is warm and inviting and student-friendly. Define terms like the Bursar's Office and matriculation that may not yet be in a student's vocabulary. These actions speak volumes. Students feel welcome and valued. Plus, they view you as an ally and supporter who is ready to help them succeed. 

## Marlo Goldstein Hode, PhD; Senior Manager, Strategic Diversity Initiatives; University of Missouri - St. Louis [00:02:58]
So one of the important things you want to include in your syllabus to communicate to students that diversity and inclusion is important to their education and specifically to your discipline would be a diversity statement. So your diversity statement is very clear in making the point to students that it's important not only to have a diversity of experiences and voices within the classroom, but also within the curriculum. And this is important for their education and enhances, and enhances everybody's ability to, to learn. So the diversity statement is very important. And then, of course, you want to have inclusive policies, so you want to make sure that you have some policies that address different religious holidays or celebrations. You want to go beyond the ADA policy for accommodations and recognize that people might need accommodations for other reasons besides disability. For example, if you have a friend or you yourself have health problems, you might also need some accommodations. So sort of just addressing the different things. You might also address resources that are available, for example, students who might be experiencing food scarcity. Or you might, definitely all students, all instructors, should make the whatever counseling services are available, should highlight those and normalize the experience of seeking out counseling and addressing being in school is stressful, particularly if you have, you know, other responsibilities and other things going on, which everybody does. So putting all of those things in your syllabus, talking about them the first day, having your own pronouns in your syllabus so students don't make any assumptions about what your, what your gender identity is or you know that they shouldn't make any assumptions about anybody else's. So putting all that information in your syllabus upfront communicates to students that you see them, you recognize that they have different needs and might need different supports, and that you're aware and you're there.  ^c1d2e7

[[Not all linguistic minority students are the same]]
## Narrator [00:05:19]
Students also need to see themselves in your course and your course materials with experts, authors, and role models representing the diversity of students on your campus and in your courses. Take inventory of your course readings, media, and the examples you use. Determine if a range of perspectives is included. Ask whose voices are missing. If your discipline has traditionally lacked diversity, engage students in a conversation about it. Invite them to help you build a database of individuals representing different viewpoints and work to develop case studies and examples that reflect their lived experiences. Students experience an increased sense of belonging, motivation, and ownership over the course when your materials showcase a diversity of scholars and challenge them to consider new perspectives, 

## Marlo Goldstein Hode, PhD; Senior Manager, Strategic Diversity Initiatives; University of Missouri - St. Louis [00:06:08]
it is so critically important for any body of knowledge to have a wide array of perspectives, lived experiences, questions brought to it. If you have a homogenous group of scholars doing scholarship, you're going to get a very limited output from that. So when you are creating your curriculum, for example, we all have the sort of canons of our discipline that we feel obligated to pass on to the next generation, and that's OK. But that also has to be balanced with actively seeking out new and different voices and perspectives, and may not be in your typical high- impact journals. You may have to make some additional effort to look for journals that are maybe even produced in other, you know, other countries or in different or related disciplines. So making that intentional effort to bring different voices to your curriculum is going to enhance your students' understanding of the, of the topic and of the issues and of the problems. 

## Narrator [00:07:19]
Students are also more prepared and motivated to submit high-quality assignments and fully completed course tasks when your expectations are crystal clear. Use rubrics, checklists, or the Transparent Assignment Template developed by Mary-Ann Winkelmes. Research has shown that outlining clear expectations benefits all students, but particularly those from underrepresented groups. Include exemplars that demonstrate what excellent submissions look like, along with what less than excellent looks like, and feedback on how to improve. The singular goal is clarity. Meeting this goal means students spend more time doing the work rather than trying to decipher what you want them to do. 

## Teresa A. Nance, PhD; Vice President, Diversity, Equity and Inclusion; Chief Diversity Officer; Associate Professor; Villanova University [00:08:01]
The reason why being more clear counts is because we hold the power of the gradebook. And because we hold the power of the gradebook, oftentimes in these culture clashes, I win, right? But when I win, students authentically lose and they can lose more than just points in your gradebook. And when we talk about losing self-esteem, losing confidence, losing efficiency or efficacy, then that's a big loss. I don't want to win at that cost to my students. So if I just need to be clear, then that's what I have to do. 

## Narrator [00:08:47]
Do your best to make all course materials accessible, eliminating barriers to achievement. Engage with your accessibility office and colleagues to learn how to best format and design documents for students relying on assistive technologies. Ensure course and assignment-related videos are captioned and a transcript is provided. These actions empower students to share with you any other needs they may have without fear of embarrassment. 

## Sharoni Denise Little, PhD, EdD; Vice Dean/Senior Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Officer; Professor, Business Communication; University of Southern California; CEO, The Strategist Company, LLC [00:09:13]
As a faculty member, I would often give a case study in class and tell the students, take 15 minutes, read it, and then we're going to come back and discuss. It wasn't until I had a student who was dyslexic. And I absolutely adored the student. We were in my office hours and he said, "Professor, is there any way I can get some of the in-class case studies prior too? Because it's difficult for me in 15 minutes to really understand." And it was at that point that I recognized my professor, having this expertise, being a diversity expert—I, too, have forgotten about some of the smaller things that we may not think about as preparing a fully inclusive classroom environment. And it was a great learning experience for me. 

## Narrator [00:10:08]
Like a good website clearly articulates an organization's mission and values, an inclusive syllabus and course clearly articulate your intention to create an inclusive learning community and ensure equitable learning opportunities for all students to achieve success. 

## Jennifer Imazeki, PhD; Associate Chief Diversity Officer for Faculty and Staff; Professor of Economics; San Diego State University [00:10:25]
When students are struggling, when they, or when they aren't doing things that we think they should be doing, or they're not doing them as well as we think they should be doing them, what can we do to help them rather than just giving them the grade and moving on? And that is really at the crux of equity-mindedness.