---
tags:
  - "source"
alias: "How might implicit bias impact teaching?"
draft: false
---
> It's imperative, as we think about implicit bias and the implications for students in the classroom, that we continue to work and evolve because as human beings, this is a lifelong process. We all have biases that have been formed, as I said, by myriad information, whether it be media, our lived experiences, something we've been told, something we've  seen. But it's incumbent to the best of our ability to engage authentically in each interaction. So because as faculty we have power, because as faculty we shape and inform the learning environment, we must challenge our own  biases. 

> There are so many examples that we can talk about bias in the classroom, that we can talk about the big kinds of things that can happen in the classroom. Where, and again, there are great studies on this where teachers believe that they call on all students equally and actually find that we call on male students more than we call on female students. When we talk about bias in the classroom, students of color report that when they answer a question, a teacher will frequently nuance their answer or restate their answer for greater clarity. And the teacher will not do that with, with a majority student. Or, even worse, a student of difference in the classroom will give an answer. The teacher will go, "mm hmm," and then a majority student will say the exact same thing and the teacher will go, "Great answer!" Now, on the face of that, we could say, "That's just overt bias! I can't believe it!" But if you think about it, if the student of color perhaps said it in, using African-American English vernacular, right? Or what we might call dialect. Perhaps the teacher is not prepared to hear that language code, right? Is not prepared to understand that answer as an intellectual response. And so the teacher is not willfully being wrong, but simply out of cultural background not understanding the correctness of that answer. But it's the acts of implicit bias that chip away at students' efficacy. And it's those things that you want to be aware of so that if you begin to realize that every student of color in your class never seems to get above a B-minus in any written essay, maybe you ought to think about why that is happening. If you're asking for volunteers and you never have a student of color volunteer in your class, again, you might want to ask what's going on. Because here's the truth. When our implicit bias reaches a point of saturation in a classroom, it cannot help but impact student learning. And here's the other thing I'm going to say, is it does it just doesn't impact the students who are targeted, but it creates an environment in the classroom where everybody is affected. Coming to understand our biases becomes a very, very important piece of a teacher's learning and understanding of their efficiency and efficacy in the classroom.

[[Failing to acknowledge non-standard dialects is a form of implicit bias]]
[[Teachers can do a lot of damage if implicit biases are unchecked]]
